In 2010, thanks to Russian national health project, Russian Research Centre for Radiology and Surgical Technologies (St. Petersburg, Russian Federation), where I work as a medical physicist, purchases four modern linacs by Elekta including Elekta Axess with beam modulator radiation head. These new machines allow to perform advanced radiation treatment techniques such as Volumetric Intensity Modulated Arc Therapy (VMAT), that starts to be very popular worldwide because of the ability to deliver treatment plans equal in quality to those created using IMRT, but with less total Monitor Units (MUs) and therefore, less treatment fraction time and lower patient exposure to the radiation leakage. This equipment permits to realize Image Guided Radiation Therapy (IGRT). The latest intensity modulated technique IGRT does not rely on assumptions about target location based on weeks or months old data. Patient’s images are used at the time of treatment to determine the accuracy of setup so that corrections can be made in real time before the treatment is delivered.[1] 

The Radiotherapy Department of The University Hospital “La Timone” (Marseille, France) where I spent 3 weeks is supplied by the same vendor as our Center. They have 3 modern linear accelerators with IGRT and VMAT options, apply breathing control gating system and have capabilities of MRI and PET-CT imaging fusion for more precise contouring.

The main objective of my visit was to learn implementation of IGRT and VMAT in UH “La Timone”. It included treatment planning and Quality Control methods features for different tumor localizations. 

For daily control of target position ConeBeam CT (CBCT) is used. In UH Timone prostate cases are more often controlled with CBCT due to considerable motion of the target. The combined using of portal imaging and CBCT during first few fractions permits to improve matching with bone and make CBCT soft tissue matching more precise. In the initial period of using IGRT in clinical practice the margins for Planning Target Volume (PTV) are chosen to be the same as before. The accumulation and statistical analyses of systematic and random errors will make possible to reduce PTV margins without loss in Tumor Control Probability (TCP) in the future. The dose contribution from CBCT acquisition should be taken into account in total dose calculation. The vendor gives the mean dose per one acquisition 1.6 cGy. If a physician considers it necessary the last fraction is corrected according to the dose from all visualization procedures. 

For cases when the target is localized at inferior lobe of lungs or at left breast the gating with breath-holding is realized (implemented? performed?) in UH Timone. In these cases during the period of preparation for radiation treatment, which usually takes 3 days, a patient gets trained in breath-holding technique. On the last day patient have 3 CT acquisition: two with breath-holding (to check repeatability) and one with free breathing (to estimate the magnitude of target movement).The accuracy of patient positioning during treatment is checked with portal imaging. 

During my stay in UH “La Timone” the final stage of VMAT commissioning took place. Before the treatment initialization, a programme of additional linac’s checks should be undertaken and methods of individual QA protocols should be developed. VMAT consists of treating the patient by means of one or more gantry arcs with continuously varying beam aperture, gantry speed and dose rate. From the point of view of quality assurance, VMAT can be thought of as simultaneous operation of dynamic multileaf collimator (DMLC or sliding window) delivery, as is now widely used for dynamic IMRT, and arc delivery, as normally used for stereotactic treatments. The commissioning program therefore needs to include tests for both of these functions separately, together with tests that challenge the simultaneous operation of both functions together. [VMAT] Such verification is realized with test, described in [2,3,4]. In the future, these tests will be a part of routine QA linac procedures.
